Redo architecture docs (#3015)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/understand/architecture.md

The server itself is stateless, meaning you can easily add more instances to handle bigger load.

> lakeFS stores data in an underlying object, ([S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [GCS](https://cloud.google.com/storage) or [ABS](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/blobs/)) store with some of its metadata stored in [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/){:target="_blank"}. (see [Data Model](data-model.md))

Author: Done.

> lakeFS stores data in an underlying object store, ([S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [GCS](https://cloud.google.com/storage) or [ABS](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/blobs/)) store, with some of its metadata stored in [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/){:target="_blank"} (see [Data Model](data-model.md)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lakeFS stores data in an underlying object store ([S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [GCS](https://cloud.google.com/storage) or [ABS](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/blobs/)) store, with some of its metadata stored in [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/){:target="_blank"} (see [Data Model](data-model.md)).
```

Author: Done.

![Architecture]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/arch.png)

> ## Deployment models

Author: Done.

lakeFS releases includes [binaries](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/releases) for common operating systems and a [containerized option](https://hub.docker.com/r/treeverse/lakefs).
Check out our guides for running lakeFS on [K8S](../deploy/k8s.md), [ECS](../deploy/aws.md#on-ecs), [Google Compute Engine](../deploy/gcp.md#on-google-compute-engine) and [more](../deploy/).

### Load Balancing

> lakeFS receives HTTP requests through 3 components: S3 Gateway, OpenApi Gateway and the Frontend UI.

Author: IMO for the architecture doc it's better to include the technology name (OpenAPI in this case).

> lakeFS receives HTTP requests through 3 components: S3 Gateway, OpenApi Gateway and the Frontend UI.

Author: Changed to `OpenAPI`.

> lakeFS uses a single port that listens to all 3 endpoints, so for most use-cases a single load-balancer pointing

Author: Changed it slightly.

<!-- The below draw.io diagram source can be found here: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1lctPtGVEmOlCNHi3jiW4XXmyQQFkxzyx/view?usp=sharing -->

![Architecture]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/arch.png)

## Ways to deploy lakeFS

lakeFS releases includes [binaries](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/releases) for common operating systems and a [containerized option](https://hub.docker.com/r/treeverse/lakefs).
Check out our guides for running lakeFS on [K8S](../deploy/k8s.md), [ECS](../deploy/aws.md#on-ecs), [Google Compute Engine](../deploy/gcp.md#on-google-compute-engine) and [more](../deploy/).

### Load Balancing

lakeFS receives HTTP requests through 3 components: S3 Gateway, OpenAPI Gateway and the Frontend UI.
lakeFS uses a single port that serves all 3 endpoints, so for most use-cases a single load-balancer pointing
to lakeFS server(s) would do.

## lakeFS Components

> ### S3 Gateway

Reviewer 2: This section's content starts with `The API Gateway implements lakeFS' compatibility with S3`.
Shouldn't it be `The S3 Gateway implements lakeFS' compatibility with S3`?

Reviewer 2: It also says that `To achieve this, the gateway exposes an HTTP listener on a dedicated host and port.`
I guess that it's also out of date as stated in line 38 above?

Author: Right, removing this line

The server itself is stateless, meaning you can easily add more instances to handle bigger load.

> lakeFS stores data in an underlying object store ([S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [GCS](https://cloud.google.com/storage) or [ABS](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/blobs/)) store, with some of its metadata stored in [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/){:target="_blank"} (see [Data Model](data-model.md)).

Reviewer 3: We also support some S3-compatible stores such as Ceph and MinIO.

<!-- The below draw.io diagram source can be found here: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1lctPtGVEmOlCNHi3jiW4XXmyQQFkxzyx/view?usp=sharing -->

![Architecture]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/arch.png)

## Ways to deploy lakeFS

> lakeFS releases includes [binaries](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/releases) for common operating systems and a [containerized option](https://hub.docker.com/r/treeverse/lakefs).

Reviewer 3: as well as a Helm chart

Check out our guides for running lakeFS on [K8S](../deploy/k8s.md), [ECS](../deploy/aws.md#on-ecs), [Google Compute Engine](../deploy/gcp.md#on-google-compute-engine) and [more](../deploy/).

### Load Balancing

> lakeFS receives HTTP requests through 3 components: S3 Gateway, OpenAPI Gateway and the Frontend UI.

Reviewer 3: these are implementation details, so it's a little confusing.

```suggestion
Accessing lakeFS is done using HTTP. lakeFS exposes a frontend UI, an [OpenAPI server](#openapi-server), as well as an S3-compatible service (see [S3 Gateway](#s3-gateway) below).
```

lakeFS uses a single port that serves all 3 endpoints, so for most use-cases a single load-balancer pointing
to lakeFS server(s) would do.

## lakeFS Components

### S3 Gateway

> S3 Gateway implements lakeFS's compatibility with S3. It implements a compatible subset of the S3 API to ensure most data systems can use lakeFS as a drop-in replacement for S3.

Reviewer 3: We have a reference with supported API operations, let's link to it?

The Swagger ([OpenAPI](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/basic-structure/){:target="_blank"}) Server exposes the full set of lakeFS operations (see [Reference](../reference/api.md)). This includes basic CRUD operations against repositories and objects, as well as versioning related operations such as branching, merging, committing and reverting changes to data.

### Storage Adapter

> The Storage Adapter is an abstraction layer for a component that is in charge of communication with any underlying object store. 

Author: Done.

> It is logically decoupled from the S3 Gateway to allow for compatibility with other types of underlying storage such as GCS or Azure Blob Storage, or non-production usages such as the local storage adapter.

Author: Rephrased, thanks.

> The Swagger ([OpenAPI](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/basic-structure/){:target="_blank"}) Server exposes the full set of lakeFS operations (see [Reference](../reference/api.md)). This includes basic CRUD operations against repositories and objects, as well as versioning related operations such as branching, merging, committing and reverting changes to data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Swagger ([OpenAPI](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/basic-structure/){:target="_blank"}) server exposes the full set of lakeFS operations (see [Reference](../reference/api.md)). This includes basic CRUD operations against repositories and objects, as well as versioning related operations such as branching, merging, committing and reverting changes to data.
```

Author: Done.

Currently, the auth service manages its own database of users and credentials and does not use IAM in any way. 

### Hooks Engine

The hooks engine enables CI/CD for data by triggering user defined [Actions](../setup/hooks.md) that will run during commit/merge. 

### Frontend UI

The UI layer is a simple browser-based client that uses the OpenAPI server. It allows management, exploration and data access to repositories, branches, commits and objects in the system.

## lakeFS Clients

There are several ways of interacting with lakeFS. Many data applications have different use-cases for lakeFS and 
we try to support as many as possible.

### OpenAPI Generated SDKs

OpenAPI specification can be used to generate lakeFS clients for many programming languages.

> For example, the python [lakefs-client](https://pypi.org/project/lakefs-client/) or the [Java Client](https://search.maven.org/artifact/io.lakefs/api-client).

Author: Done.

### lakectl

> [lakectl](../reference/commands.md) is a CLI tool that enables lakeFS operations from your preferred terminal.

Author: Done.

### Spark Client

> The lakeFS [spark-client](../reference/spark-client.md) makes it easy to perform
> ETL operations on lakeFS stored data, like [garbage-collection](../reference/garbage-collection.md) or [export](../reference/export.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lakeFS [Spark Metadata Client](../reference/spark-client.md) makes it easy to perform
operations related to lakeFS metadata. Examples include [garbage collection](../reference/garbage-collection.md) or [exporting data from lakeFS](../reference/export.md).
```

Author: Done.

Currently, the auth service manages its own database of users and credentials and does not use IAM in any way. 

### Hooks Engine

The hooks engine enables CI/CD for data by triggering user defined [Actions](../setup/hooks.md) that will run during commit/merge. 

### UI

The UI layer is a simple browser-based client that uses the OpenAPI server. It allows management, exploration and data access to repositories, branches, commits and objects in the system.

## Applications

> As a rule of thumb, lakeFS supports any s3-compatible application. This means that many common data applications work with lakeFS out of the box.

Reviewer 3: link to https://docs.lakefs.io/integrations/ ?

## lakeFS Clients

> Some data applications require deeper integrations with lakeFS to support different use-cases or enhanced functionality which is provided by lakeFS clients.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some data applications benefit from deeper integrations with lakeFS to support different use-cases or enhanced functionality which is provided by lakeFS clients.
```

### OpenAPI Generated SDKs

OpenAPI specification can be used to generate lakeFS clients for many programming languages.

> For example, the Python [lakefs-client](https://pypi.org/project/lakefs-client/) or the [Java client](https://search.maven.org/artifact/io.lakefs/api-client).

Reviewer 3: Maybe state that we publish and maintain the Python, Java and Scala APIs and these are released on all new lakeFS releases.

Author: Done.

### lakectl

[lakectl](../reference/commands.md) is a CLI tool that enables lakeFS operations using the lakeFS API from your preferred terminal.

### Spark Metadata Client

The lakeFS [Spark Metadata Client](../reference/spark-client.md) makes it easy to perform
operations related to lakeFS metadata, at scale. Examples include [garbage collection](../reference/garbage-collection.md) or [exporting data from lakeFS](../reference/export.md).

### lakeFS Hadoop FileSystem

> While it is possible to interact with lakeFS using Hadoop's S3AFIleSystem, doing so may introduce performance problems.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thanks to the [S3 Gateway](#s3-gateway), it is possible to interact with lakeFS using Hadoop's S3AFIleSystem, but due to limitations of the S3 API, doing so requires reading and writing data objects through the lakeFS server.
```

Currently, the auth service manages its own database of users and credentials and does not use IAM in any way. 

### Hooks Engine

The hooks engine enables CI/CD for data by triggering user defined [Actions](../setup/hooks.md) that will run during commit/merge. 

> ### Frontend UI

Author: ok ok

The UI layer is a simple browser-based client that uses the OpenAPI server. It allows management, exploration and data access to repositories, branches, commits and objects in the system.

> ## lakeFS Clients
> 
> There are several ways of interacting with lakeFS. Many data applications have different use-cases for lakeFS and 
> we try to support as many as possible.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Applications 

As a rule of thumb, lakeFS supports any s3-compatible application. This means that many common data applications work with lakeFS out of the box. 

## lakeFS Clients

Some data applications require deeper integrations with lakeFS to support different use-cases or enhanced functionality which is provided by lakeFS clients.
```

Feel free to change the wording here but I tried to add details I think worth including.

Author: Done.

> ### OpenAPI Generated SDKs

Reviewer 4: Can you move all the clients up here so that they are listed after the lakefS clients title?

Author: I prefer to keep the sdks first. They are clients too, and are used by the other clients as well.

OpenAPI specification can be used to generate lakeFS clients for many programming languages.
For example, the Python [lakefs-client](https://pypi.org/project/lakefs-client/) or the [Java client](https://search.maven.org/artifact/io.lakefs/api-client).

### lakectl

[lakectl](../reference/commands.md) is a CLI tool that enables lakeFS operations using the lakeFS API from your preferred terminal.

### Spark Metadata Client

The lakeFS [Spark Metadata Client](../reference/spark-client.md) makes it easy to perform

> operations related to lakeFS metadata. Examples include [garbage collection](../reference/garbage-collection.md) or [exporting data from lakeFS](../reference/export.md).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
operations related to lakeFS metadata, at scale. Examples include [garbage collection](../reference/garbage-collection.md) or [exporting data from lakeFS](../reference/export.md).
```

Author: Done.

### lakeFS Hadoop FileSystem

While it is possible to interact with lakeFS using Hadoop's S3AFIleSystem, doing so may introduce performance problems.

> Using [lakeFSFileSystem](../integrations/spark.md#access-lakefs-using-the-lakefs-specific-hadoop-filesystem) increases Spark ETL jobs performance by executing the metadata operations on the lakeFS server,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using [lakeFSFileSystem](../integrations/spark.md#access-lakefs-using-the-lakefs-specific-hadoop-filesystem) preserve Spark ETL jobs performance by executing the metadata operations on the lakeFS server,
```

Author: `Increases` is better 😈

Reviewer 4: but is it true? :)

Author: Compared to using lakeFS without lakeFSFilesystem? For high volumes it is true

Reviewer 4: >Compared to using lakeFS without lakeFSFilesystem
that is correct. I was thinking about the comparison to using Spark in general without lakeFS
